.\" Manpage for omnibus-cli.
.\" Source: core/cli_audit.zig
.TH OMNIBUS-CLI 1 "2026-05-10" "OmniBus 0.3.0-dev" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
omnibus-cli \- OmniBus blockchain command-line audit client
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B omnibus-cli
[\fIglobal-flags\fR] \fIsubcommand\fR [\fIargs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B omnibus-cli
is a pure-stdlib Zig binary that connects to a running
.B omnibus-node
via JSON-RPC HTTP (port 8332 mainnet, 18332 testnet, 28332 regtest) and
prints balance breakdowns, stake activity, reputation snapshots, validator
sets and per-day transaction reports \(em the same data the React
.I DailyAuditPage
shows, but without browser, WebSocket, or
.I node_modules.
.PP
The binary is read-only: it never signs, broadcasts or mutates chain state.
For signed flows (stake, swap, name register, agent register) use
.B aweb3
or send a signed payload via
.BR curl (1).
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
.TP
.BI \-\-rpc " URL"
Override RPC URL. Accepts
.IR http://host[:port][/path]
or
.IR https://...
(HTTPS routes through
.BR curl (1)).
Default
.IR http://127.0.0.1:8332 .
.TP
.BI \-\-chain " NAME"
Selects port:
.B mainnet
(8332),
.B testnet
(18332),
.B regtest
(28332). Default
.BR mainnet .
.TP
.B \-\-remote
Use
.IR https://omnibusblockchain.cc:8443/api-{chain} .
Requires
.BR curl (1)
in
.BR PATH .
.TP
.BI \-\-token " BEARER"
Sets
.RI ` Authorization:\ Bearer\ <token>'
header on all RPC requests.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit raw JSON-RPC response (no pretty-print).
.TP
.B \-\-no-color
Disable ANSI colors. Auto-disabled when stdout is not a TTY.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS Chain inspection
.TP
.B health
Print chain stats: height, tip hash, total supply, validator count, mempool
size, peer count, current block reward, sync status. RPC:
.IR getchainmetrics " + " getsyncstatus .
.TP
.B validators
List all active validators with weight and entry block. RPC:
.IR getvalidators .
.TP
.BI "stakers " "[limit=10]"
Top stakers sorted by amount descending. RPC:
.IR getstakers .
.SS Wallet & balance
.TP
.BI "balance " "<addr>"
Full balance breakdown: wallet total, staked subset, available, reputation
tier, four cups (LOVE/FOOD/RENT/VACATION). RPC:
.IR getbalance " + " getstake " + " getreputation .
.TP
.BI "history " "<addr> [filter]"
Transaction history with kind filter
.RB ( all | stake | sent | received | mined ).
Capped at 200 rows. RPC:
.IR getaddresshistory .
.SS Stake & validators
.TP
.BI "stake " "<addr>"
Current stake plus full activity log of stake/unstake transactions, ending
with self-consistency check. RPC:
.IR getstake " + " getaddresshistory .
.SS Reputation
.TP
.BI "reputation " "<addr>"
Reputation total (0..1,000,000), tier, four cups, lifetime metrics
(first/last active block, total mined, violations). RPC:
.IR getreputation .
.SS Daily audit
.TP
.BI "daily " "<addr> [days=30]"
Per-day TX bucket grouped by
.IR block_height/86400
(1s blocks). Same data as the React DailyAuditPage. RPC:
.IR getaddresshistory .
.SS Audit & verify
.TP
.BI "verify " "<addr>"
Sanity check: chain
.I getstake
total vs sum of stake/unstake TXs from
.IR getaddresshistory .
Exit code 0 on match, 1 on mismatch.
.SH ENDPOINT RESOLUTION ORDER
.IP 1. 4
.B \-\-remote
sets URL to
.IR https://omnibusblockchain.cc:8443/api-{chain} .
.IP 2. 4
.B \-\-rpc
parses the URL.
.IR https://
schemes route through
.BR curl (1).
.IP 3. 4
.B \-\-chain
maps to
.IR 127.0.0.1:{8332,18332,28332} .
.IP 4. 4
Default
.IR 127.0.0.1:8332 .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The binary itself reads no environment variables. Shell wrappers and the
provided completions honour:
.TP
.B OMNIBUS_RPC_URL
Default value for
.BR \-\-rpc .
.TP
.B OMNIBUS_RPC_TOKEN
Default value for
.BR \-\-token .
.TP
.B OMNIBUS_CHAIN
Default value for
.BR \-\-chain .
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set, completions/wrapper add
.BR \-\-no-color .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.omnibus/cli.conf
Optional KEY=VALUE config consumed by shell wrappers.
.TP
.I ~/.omnibus/known_addresses
One bech32 address per line. Used by bash/zsh/fish completion to suggest
.IR <addr>
arguments.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/omnibus-cli
Default install location (cf.
.IR scripts/install-cli.sh ).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
RPC error, parse error, or sanity-check mismatch
.RB ( verify ).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error: unknown command, missing required address argument.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Local mainnet health check:
.PP
.RS
.B omnibus-cli health
.RE
.PP
Balance against the public testnet:
.PP
.RS
.B omnibus-cli --remote --chain testnet balance ob1qzhrauq0xe9hg033ccup7vlgsdmj6kcxyza9zp0
.RE
.PP
7-day breakdown as JSON, fed into jq:
.PP
.RS
.B "omnibus-cli --json daily ob1q...zp0 7 | jq '.result.transactions[].kind' | sort | uniq -c"
.RE
.PP
Sanity-check stake state and exit nonzero on mismatch:
.PP
.RS
.B "omnibus-cli verify ob1q...zp0 || systemctl restart omnibus-node"
.RE
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
On RPC failure
.B omnibus-cli
synthesizes a JSON-RPC error envelope so callers can keep one parse path. Common
messages:
.TP
.I "Cannot reach RPC at http://HOST:PORT/PATH (...). Is omnibus-node running?"
The TCP connect to the local node failed.
.TP
.I "curl spawn failed: ENOENT (is curl in PATH?)"
The
.B \-\-remote
or
.IR https://
flags require
.BR curl (1).
.TP
.I "Malformed RPC response (no body separator)"
The peer returned an HTTP response without
.IR "\\r\\n\\r\\n" .
.SH RESERVED FOR FUTURE VERSIONS
The following RPC categories are exposed by
.B omnibus-node
but do not yet have CLI wrappers; use
.BR curl (1)
with
.IR API_REFERENCE.md
for now: exchange/DEX, HTLC/swap, names (.omnibus, .arbitraje), agents,
governance, escrow, channels, notarize, subscriptions, multisig, PQ
attestation, mining ops, network admin.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR omnibus-node (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR curl (1),
.IR docs/CLI_REFERENCE.md ,
.IR docs/CLI_TUTORIAL.md ,
.IR docs/CLI_COOKBOOK.md ,
.IR API_REFERENCE.md .
.SH AUTHORS
OmniBus contributors. Source:
.IR core/cli_audit.zig .
.SH BUGS
Report at
.IR https://github.com/SAVACAZAN/OmniBus-BlockChainCore/issues .
